http://bitig.org/?lang=e&mod=1&tid=1&oid=15&m=1


The Kultegin Inscription (1-40 lines)
1
uzaKuK tyri SRa JGz jr QiLOxDa KinRa Kisi UGLi QLNms Kisi UGLiOa uza Cumpam BUmNQGN istmiQGN ULRmY ULRpN turq BUDNyilin turusun TUTa birms iti birms

Öze Kök : Teŋіri132 : asïra : yaγïz : Jer : qïlïntaquda : ekin ara : kisi : oγulï : qïlïnmïs : kisi : oγulïnta : öze : ečüm apam : Bumïn qaγan133 : Estemi qaγan134 : olurmïš : olurupan : Türük : budunïγ : Elin : törüsün : tuta : bermis : iti : bermis :


When the blue sky above and the brown earth below were created, between them a human being was created. Over the human beings, my ancestors Bumin Kagan and Istemi Kagan ruled. They ruled people by Turkish laws, they led them and succeeded.
2
turt BULy QUp JGirms susulpn turt BULyDQi BUDNG QUpLms QUpBz QiLms BYLGG jqOrms tizlgg suKurms ilgru QDRQN jiYQatgiKiru tmrQpGQatgi xUORms KinRa

törüt : buluŋ : qop : yaγï ermis : sü sülepen : törüt : buluŋtaqï : budunïγ : qop almïš : qop baz qïlmïs : bašlïγïγ : jüküntürmüs : tizеligig : sökürmüs : ilgerü : Qadïrqan : Jïšqa tegi : keri : Temir qapïγqa tegi : qonturmus : ekin ara :

From all four sides there were enemies. They sent there lance-bearing armies to conquer all those people in the four quarters of the world and made them still. They made bow those, who had heads and made kneel those, who had knees. To eastwards up to the Kadyrkhan mountain forests and westwards as far as the Iron Gate they went on campaign.
3
idiUQSz quK turq Wa ULRURrms bila QGNrms LpsGNrms BUJRxijma bilga rmsrW LprmsrW bglrijma BUDNijma tuzrms NiuCin ilg WaTUTms rW ilgTUTp turug itms uziWa

ïdï oqsuz : Kök Türük : anča : olurur ermis : bilge : qaγan ermis : alïp qaγan ermis : bujruq jeme : bilge ermis erinč : alïp ermis erinč : begleri jeme : budunï jeme : tüz ermis : anï üčün : Еlig : anča tutmus : erinč : Еlig tutup : Тörüg : etmis : üze anča :


There were Kok (Blue) Turks between the two boundaries, having neither rulers nor masters. Wise kagans were they. Great kagans were they. Their buyruqs (officials), too, were wise and brave, indeed. They were great too. Both the lords and people were straightforward and honest. For this reason, kagans were able to rule the state.
4
KrgK BULms JUGCi uyra qun TUGSQDa buKli Culgl TBGC tuput pR pURm kiRQz uCxURiQN UTzTTR kiTF TTBi BUWa BUDN Klpn SiGTms JUGLams OG Kulg QGNrms OaKisra insi QGN

kergek : bolmus : yoγučï : sïγïtčï : öŋre : kün : toγusïqta138 : Böküli : Čölüg el139 : Tabγač : Tüpüt140 : Apar 141 : Purum142 : Qïrqïz143 : Üč Qurïqan146 : Otuz Tatar144 : Qïtaň 145 : Tatabi147 : bunča : budun : kelipen : sïγïtamïs : yoγulamïs : antïγ : külüg : qaγan : ermis : anta kisre : inisi : qaγan :


They (the lords) thus passed away (lit.: 'flied away to Tengri'). As mourners and laments there came from the east, the representatives of the people of the Böküli Čölüg (Korea), Tabγač (Chinese), Avar, Rome, Kirgiz, Uc-Quriqan, Otuz-Tatar, Qitaŋ and Tatabi, this many people came and mourned and lamented. So famous kagans were they. Then the younger brothers became kagans,
5
BULmsrW UGLiTi QGNBULmsrW OaKisra inisi CisintgQiLNmDxrW UGLi Qyintg QiLNmDxrW bilgsiz QGNULRmsrW JBLQ QGN ULRmsrW BUJRxijma bilgszrW JBQLrmsrW

bolmis erinč : oγulï atï : qaγan : bolmis erinč : anta kisre : inisi : ečisin teg : qïlïnmadïq erinč : oγulï : аqaŋïn teg : qïlïnmadïq erinč : bilgesiz : qaγan : olurmïs erinč : yablaq : qaγan : olurmïs erinč : bujruqï : jeme : bilgesiz erinč : yablaq ermis erinč :


and their sons became kagans. But, apparently the younger brothers did not resemble their elder brothers. The sons did not resemble their fathers. Unwise kagans succeeded to the throne. Bad kagans succeeded to the throne.
6
bglri BUDNi tuzsz uCn TBGCBUDN tblgin Kurlg uCun RmQCisin uCun unli Cili KiKsurtqin uCun bgli BUDNLiG JUyYURTxin uCun turq BUDN illdq ilin iCGNU iDms

begleri : budunï : tüzsüz : üčün : Tabγačbudun : teblegin : körlüg : üčün : armaqčïsïn : üčün : inili : ečili : kеksürtükin : üčün : begli : budunlïγ : yoŋušurtuqïn : üčünTürük : budun : elledik : Еlin : ïčγanu : ïdmïs :


The lords and people went unfair. Since they give way to Chinese people, since they were defrauded by them, younger and elder brothers became revengeful and enemy to each other. Turkish people were exiled.
7
QGNLDx QGNiN jitru iDms TBGC BUDNQa bglK URiUGLin QULBUwi silK kizUGLn KuyBUwi turq bglr turq aTin iTi TBGCGi bglr TBGC aTin TUTpN TBGC QGNQ

qaγanladïq : qaγanïn : jetіrü : ïdmïs : Tabγač budunqa : beglik : urï oγulïn : qul : boltï : silik : qïz oγulïn : küŋ boltï : Türük : begler : Türük : atïn : ïtï : Tabγačγï : begler : Tabγač : atïn : tutupan : Tabγač : qaγanqa :


The kagans were exiled. Chinese people made your kind sons slave; made your beautiful daughters servant. The Turkish lords forgot their Turkish titles. Those lords held Chinese titles and obeyed the Chinese emperor for fifty years,
8
Kurms lgjiL isgKuCg birms ilgru qun TUGSQDabuKli QGNQa tgi sulju birms xURGRU tmrQpGQa tgi sulju birms TBGC QGNQa ilin turusin Libirms turq QRaQmG

körmüs : elig jïl : isig küčüg : bermis : ilgerü : kün toγusïqda : Böküli : qaγanqa : tegi : sülüjü : bermis : qurïγaru : Temir qapïγqa : tegi : sülüjü : bermis : Tabγač : qaγanqa : Еlin : törüsin : alï bermis : Türük : qara : qamïγ :


and gave their deeds and services to him. They went on campaigns up to the Böküli kagan in east, and as far as the Iron Gate in west. They gave the Chinese emperor to rule the state and lordship.
9
BUDN Watims illg BUDNrtm ilm mTiQNi KmKa ilg QzGNRmn tirrms QGNLG BUDN rtm QGNmQNi naQGNQa isgKuCg birurmn tirrms Watip TBGC QGNQa JGiBULms

budun : anča temis : Еllig : budun ertim : Еlim : ïmtï qanï : kіmke : Еlig : qazγanurman : tеr ermis : qaγanlïγ : budun : ertim : qaγanïm qanï : ne qaγanqa : isig küčüg : berürmen : tir ermis : anča tep : Tabγač : qaγanqa : yaγï bolmïs :


Then, Turkish common people said as follows: "I had a state. Where is my state now? Who do I give my state to? I had kagans. Where is my kagan now? Who do I give my deeds and services to?" So they became hostile to the Chinese emperor.
10
JGiBULp itnu JRTUNU UmDx JNa iCKms BUWa isgKuCg birtqgru SQNmTi turq BUDN ulurjin URGSRTJin tirrms JUQDU BRiR rms uza turq tyrisi turq iDx jiri

yaγï bolïp : etіnü : yаrаtunu : umаdïq : yana : ičіkmis : bunča : isig küčüg : bertük gerü : saqïnmаtï : Türük : budun : ölürüjen : urïγsaratïyan : ter ermis : yuqadu : barïr : ermis : öze : Türük : Teŋrisi : Türük : Ïduq Jeri :


They became hostile and strike against, (but) they submitted again. They were near to annihilated. They couldn't get that they gave all their deeds and services, they had no warn against. All Turkish people degraded, they had no generation and went to ruins. Then Turk Tengri above, Turkish holy Earth
11
SUBi Watms turq BUDN JUx BULmzUN tijn BUDN BULCUNtijn Qym iltrsQGNG ugm ilbilgaQTUNG tyri tupsiOa TUTp jugru Kuturms rW QymQGN jitijgrmi rn TYQms TYRa

subï : anča temis : Türük : budun : yoq : bolmazun : tejin : budun bolčun tejin : аqanïm : Elteris qaγanïγ : ögüm : Elbilge qatunïγ : Teŋіri : töpesinte : tutup :
jügürü : kötürmüs erinč : aqanïm : qaγan : jeti jegirmi : erin : tašqïmïs : tašïra :


and Water said as follows: "in order to Turkish people would not go to ruin and in order to it should be a nation again", they rose my father Ilteris Kagan, and my mother Ilbilga Katun, to the top and sat them upwards on the throne. My father, the kagan, gathered together seventeen brave lords.
12
JURJUR tijn Kusdp BLkDQi TGkms TGDQinms tirlp jtmsrBULms tyri quC birtq uCn QymQGN susi buritg rms JGisi xUFtgrms ilgru xURGRU sulp tirms QUBRTms QmGi

yoruyor : tejin : ükü еsidіp : balïqdaqï : taγïqmïs : taγdaqï : inmis : tirilip : jetmis er bolmïs : Teŋіri : küč : bertük : üčün : аqanïm : qaγan : süsi : böri teg : ermis :
yaγïsï : qoň teg ermis : ilgerü : qurïγaru : sülep : tеrmis : qubartmïs : qamïγï :


All having heard that they went off on campaigns, those who were in towns went off to fields, and those who were on mountains went down, gathered together seventy brave men. Tengri gave them power, my father's army was like wolves, their enemies were like sheep. Having gone on campaigns forward and backward,
13
jtijuzr BULms jtijuzr BULp lsrms QGNSRms BUDNG Kuydms xULDms BUDNG turq turusun iCGNms BUDNG Cumpam turusiWa JRTms BUYGURms tulis TRDUY

jetijüzer : bolmïs : jetijüzer : bolïp : elsiremis : qaγansïramïs : budunïγ : küŋdemis : quldamïs : budunïγ : Türük : törüsün : ïčγanmïs : budunïγ : ečümаpam : törüsünče : yarаtmïs : bušγurmïs : Töles : Tarduš148 : budunïγ : /anta itmis : /


gathered together seven hundred soldiers. After they had numbered seven hundred men, he brought them to order and trained people who had lost their state and their kagan, people who had turned to slaves and servants, people who had lost the Turkish institutions, brought to order and followed the rules of my ancestors. Then he gave people Tolis and Tardush states.
14
JBGUG YDG Oa brms brja TBGC BUDN JGirms jiRJL BzQGN TxUzUGz BUDUNJGirms kiRQz xURiQN UTzTTR kiTF TTBi xUp JGirms QymQGN BUW

Jabγuγ : Šadïγ149 : anta : bermis : berje : Tabγač : budun : yaγï : ermis : jïrïya : Baz qaγan : Toquz Oγuz 150 : budunï : yaγï : ermis : Qïrγïz : Qurïqan : Otuz Tatar : Qïtaň :
Tatabï : qop : yaγï : ermis : аqanïm : qaγan : bunča : ...


And gave them two rulers, a yabgu and a šad. Chinese people were our enemy in south, Tokuz-Oguz people in north with Baz Kagan on head were our enemies too. The Kirgiz, Quriqan, Otuz-Tatar, Qitaŋ and Tatabi – they all were hostile to us. My father, the kagan,
15
kiRQ RTxi jti JULi sulms jgrmi suys suysms tyri JRLQDx uCun illgg lsrtms QGNLGG QGNSRTms JGiG BzQiLms tizlgg suKurms BYLGG juKOur

qïrïq : artuqï : jeti : yolï : sülemis : jegirmi : süŋüs : süŋüsmis : Teŋіri : yarïlqaduq : üčün : elligig : elsіretmis : qaγanlïγïγ : qaγansïratmïs : yaγïγ : bazqïlmïs : tizelіgig : sükürmis : bašlïγïγ : jüküntümis : qaŋïm : qaγan ...


was on campaigns forty-seven times and engaged in twenty battles. By the grace of Tengri, he took the realm of those who had had a realm, and captured the kagan of those who had a kagan; he subjugated enemies. He made powerful enemies kneel and proud ones to bow. (My father, the kagan,)
16
turug QzGNp UCa BRms Qym QGNQa BYLJU BzQGNG BLBL tiKdms ULturudi uza CimQGN ULRTi CimQGN ULRpN turq BUDNG jiCa itdi igti CiGFG

törüg : qаzγanïp : uča : barmïs : аqaŋïm : qaγanqa : bašlayu : Baz qaγanïγ : balbal : tikmis : ol törüde : öze : ečüm qaγan : olurtï : ečüm qaγan : olurupan : Türük : budunïγ : ječe іtdi : іgіti : čïγaŋïγ/ : bay : qïltï : azïγ : üküš : qïltï : /


after he had founded (such a great) empire and gained power, passed away (lit.: 'went flying'). Balbals erected for my father, the kagan, were first erected from Baz Kagan's balbals. My uncle succeeded to the throne then. My uncle, the kagan, organized and nourished Turkish people anew. He made poor people rich and few people numerous.
17
CimQGN ULRTxDa uzm TRDUY BUDN uza YDrtm CmQGN birla ilgru JYLugz YOUy JziQatgi suldmz xURGRU tmrQpGQa tgi suldmz Kugmn Ya ki

ečüm qaγan : olurtuqda : özüm : Tarduš : budun : öze : šad ertim : ečüm qaγan : birle : ilgerü : Yašïl ügüz 151 : Šantuŋ : yazïqa152 tegi : süledimiz :
qurïγaru : Temir qapïγqa : tegi : süledimiz : Kögmen153 : аša : Qï/rqïz : jeriŋe : tegi : süledimiz : /


When my uncle, the kagan, succeeded to the throne, I was šad over Tardush people. Together with my uncle, the kagan, we went on campaigns eastwards up to Green River (= Yellow River) and Shantung plain, and we went on campaigns westwards as far as the Iron Gate, (We went on campaigns up to the land of Kirgiz) beyond the Kogmen (mountains).
18
QmGi biYUTz suldmz uCjgrmi suyYdmz ilgg ilsrtdmz QGNLGG QGNSRTDmz tizlgg suKrtmz BYLGG jquOrtmz turgs QGN turqmz

qamïγï : bešotuz : süledimiz : üčjegirmi : süŋüšdimiz : Еlligig : elsiretdimiz : qaγanlïγïγ : qaγansïratdïmïz : tizеligig : sökürtimiz : bašlïγïγ : jöküntürtimiz : Türügeš154 : qaγan : Türükmüz : budunmïz : erti : bilmedikin :


We went on campaigns twenty-five times in all and we fought thirteen times. We took the realm of those who had a realm, and we captured the kagan of those who had a kagan; we made powerful enemies kneel and proud ones to bow. The Turgesh kagan (and his people) was our Turk. (Because of their unawareness and foolishness)
19
uCun bizya JyLxin uCun QGNi ulti BUJRxi bglwi jma ulti UNx BUDN mgK Kurti Cumz pamz TUTms jirSUB idsz BULmzUN tijn zBUDNG itp JR

üčün : bizіŋe : yaŋïlqïn : üčün : qaγanï : ölti : buyruqï : begleri : jeme : ölti : On oq : budun : emgek : körtü : ečümüz : apamïz : tutmïs : Jer sub idsiz : bolmazun : tejin : az budunïγ : ïtï : ar...


their being traitorous to us, their kagan had died; his buyruqs and lords, had died too. The On-Oq people suffered (a great deal). In order the land (lit.: 'earth and water'), which was ruled by our ancestors, not to be left without a ruler, we organized Az people and put them in order.... and because they were treasons their kagan had died; his buyruqs and lords, also
20
BRSbg rti QGNT BUOa biz birtmz siylm xUWJUG birtmz uzaJywi QGNi ulti BUDNi KuyxUL BUwi Kugmn jirSUB idsz QLmzUNtijn zQiRQz BUDNG JRT

...bars beg : erti : qaγan at : bunta : biz : bertimiz : siŋilim : qunčuyum : bertimiz : üze yaŋïltï : qaγanï : ölti : budunï : küŋ qul : boltï : Kögmen : Jer sub : idsiz : qalmazun tejin : az Qïrqïz : budunïγ : jarat...


was Bars Beg. It was we, who had given him the title of kagan. We had also given him my younger sister, the princess, in marriage. But, he betrayed (us). (As a result) the kagan was killed and people became slaves and servants. In order the Kogman land would not remain without a ruler, we organized the Az and Kirgiz peoples, and then we came (back) and fought.
21
JNa birtmz lgru QDRQN jiYG Ya BUDNG WaxUOURTmz Waitdmz xUQGRU KyuTRmNQa turq BUDNG WaxUORTmz Watdmz ULudKa xUL xULLG BULms

yana : bertimiz : ilgerü : Qadïrqan : Jïšïγ : aša : budunïγ : anča : qonturtïmïz : anča : itdimiz : qurïγaru : KeŋüTarmanqa155 : tegi : Türük : budunïγ : anča qonturtïmïz : anča tedimiz : ol ödke : qul : qullïγ : bolmïs /küŋ : küŋlig : bolmïs : erti : inisi : ečisin : bilmez : erti : oγulï : аqaŋïn : bilmez : erti : /


We gave (them) back.... Eastwards as far as beyond the Khingan mountains we thus settled and organized people; westwards as far as Kaŋu Tarman we thus settled and organized Turkish people. At that time our slaves themselves had slaves (and servants themselves had servants. Younger brothers did not acknowledge their elder brothers, and sons did not acknowledge their fathers).
22
WaQzGNms itms lmz turumz rti turq UGz bglri BUDN sdy uzatyri BSmSR SRijir tlnmsr turq BUDN lyn turuyn KmRTTi

anča : qazγanmïs : etmis : Еlіmiz : törümіz : erti : Türük : Oγuz : begleri : budun : esidiŋ : üze Teŋіri : basmasar : asraJer : tilinmeser : Türük : budun : Еliniŋ : törüsün : kim : artatï /udаč...ï : Türük : budun : ert...z : /


We had such well-acquired and well-organized state and power. You, Turkish and Oguz lords and peoples, hear this! If the sky above did not collapse, and if the earth below did not go away, what could destroy your state and power? О Turkish people, regret and repent!
23
uKun Kurguyn uCun igdms bilga QGNyN rmsBRms dguly KOu JywG JBLQ Kigurtg JRQLG QON Klp JFaltdi suyglg QON Kljn suraltdi iDxutqn ji

ökün : körügüŋin : üčün : igidmiš : bilge : qaγaŋïn : ermiš barmïš : edgü Еliŋ : kentü : yaŋïltïγ : yablaq : kegürteg : yarаqlïγ : qantan : kelіp : yaňaеltedi : süŋgülüg : qandan : kelіp : süre еltedi : Ïduq Ötüken : /jer…..budun : bardïq : ilgerü : barïγma /


Because of your unruliness, you yourselves betrayed your wise kagan, who had (always) supported you. And you yourselves betrayed your good realm, which was free and independent. And you (yourselves) caused discord. Where did the armed (people) come from and dispersed you? Where did the lancer come from and carried you away? You, people of sacred Otukan mountains, it was you, who went away.
24
BRDG xURiGRU BRGma BRDG BRDx jirda dgug ULrW QNy SUBCa jugrti suyquy TGCa JTDi bglr URiUGLy xULBUwi slKkizUGLy KuyBULwi bilmdquCn

bardïγ : qurïγaru : barïγma : bardïγ : bardïq : jerde : edgüg : ol erinč : qanïŋ : subča : jügürti : söŋükün : taγča : yatаdï : beglik : urï oγulïŋ : qul boltï : silik qïz oγulïŋ : küŋ boltï : bilmedük üčün : yablaqïŋïn : üčün : ečüm qaγan : uča bardï :


Those (of you), who meant to go to east went to east, and those (of you), who meant to go to west went to west. In places you went away, your (only) profit was the following: your blood ran like a river, and your bones were heaped up like a mountain; your sons worthy of becoming lords became slaves, and your daughters worthy of becoming ladies became servants. Because of your unawareness
25
BYLJU kiRQzQGNG BLBL tiKdm turq BUDNG TiKusi JxBULmzUN tijn QymQGNG ugmQTUNG Kutrms tyri ilbirgma tyri turq BUDN TiKusi JxBULmzUN

bašlayu : Qïrqïz qaγanïγ : balbal : tikdim : Türük : budunïγ : atï küsü : yoq bolmazun : tijin : aqaŋïm qaγanïγ : ögüm qatunïγ : kötürmiš : Teŋіri : Еl bеrigme :
Teŋіri : Türük : budun : atï küsü : yoq bolmazun : tijin : /özümüz : ol Teŋіri : /


and because of your mischievousness, my uncle, the kagan, met his death. First I erected balbals (for him) beginning from Kirgiz kagan's. Tengri, which had raised my father, the kagan, and my mother, the katun, and which had granted them a state, For the name and fame of the Turkish people would not perish, (that Tengri)
26
QGN ULRTDirW nyjiLsG BUDNQa ULRmDm iCra YSz TYRa TUNSz JBzJBLQ BUDOa uza uza ULRTm inm qultign birla suzlYdmz Qymz Cimz Qz

qaγan : olurtadï erinč : neŋ yïlïsïγ : budunqa : olurmadïm : ičre ačsïz : tïšra : tonsuz : yabïz yablaq : budunta : üze : olurtum : inim Kültegin birle : sözlešdimiz : аqaŋïmïz : ečümüz : qaz/γanmïš : budun : atï küsü : yoq bolmazun/


enthroned (me). I did not become ruler of wealthy and prosperous people at all; (on the contrary,) I became a ruler of poor and miserable people, who were food-less inside and cloth-less outside. I and Kultegin, my younger brother, consulted together. For the name and fame of people, which our father and uncle had ruled, would not perish, and
27
tijn turq BUDN uCun tunUDmDm Kuntz ULRmD inm Kultign birla KiYD birli ulujitu QzGOm WaQzGNp birKi BUDNG UTSUB QiLmDm mz

tijin : Türük : budun : üčün : tün udïmadïm : küntüz : olurmadïm : іnim : Kültegin birle : eki šad : birle : ölü jitü : qazγandïm : anča qazγanïp : bіrіki : budunïγ : ot sub qïlmadïm : /men... jersayu /


For the sake of Turkish people, I did not sleep at night and I did not relax by day. Together with my younger brother, Kultegin, the two šads, we worked to death and I won. Having won and gathered in that way, I did not let people split into two parts like fire and water. (When) I (succeeded to the throne) in all countries people, who had gone (in almost all directions)
28
BRmY BUDN ulujitu JDGN JLyN JNaKlti BUDNG igdjin tijn jiRYRU UGz BUDN Tpa ilgru kiTF TTBi BUDN Tpa birgru TBGCTpa ULGsu Kijgrmi

barmïš : budun : ölü jitü : yadaγan : yalïŋïn : yana kelti : budunïγ : igіdejin : tijin : jїrїγaru : Oγuz : budun : tapa : ilgerü : Qïtan : Tatabï : budun : tapa : bergerü : Tabγač tapa : uluγ sü : eki jegirmi : süledim : ... süŋüšdüm :


vagrant people came back utterly exhausted, without horses and without clothes came back. In order to nourish people, I, with great armies, went on campaigns twelve times, northwards against Oguz people, eastwards against the Qitan and Tatabi, southwards against Chinese, (and I fought ... times).
29
Kisra tyri JRLQzU xUTm BRuCn ulugm BRuCun ultCi BUDNG tirgru igtm JLyBUDNG TUNLG CiGF BUDNG BJQiwm zBUDNG uKYQiLTm iGRllgda Q

kisre : Teŋіri : yarïlqazu : qutum : bar üčün : ülügüm : bar üčün : ölüteči : budunïγ : tirigerü : igitim : yalaŋ budunïγ : tonlïγ : čïγaň : budunïγ : bay qïltïm : az budunïγ : üküš qïltïm : ïγar Еlligde : qa/γanlïγta : jeg qïltïm : törüt buluŋdaqï : /


After (that), since I had fortune and since I had good luck – my Tengri was gracious! – I brought people to life, who were going to perish, and nourished them. I dressed naked people with clothes and I made poor people rich and few people numerous. I made them superior than people, who had great states and (esteemed rulers).
30
BUDNG xUp BzQiwm JGsiz Qiwm xUp mya Kurti isgKuCg birur BUWa turug QzGNp inm Kultign uzaWa KrgKBUwi QymQGN UCDxDa inm Kultign jit

budunïγ : qop : baz qïltïm : jaγsïz qïltïm : qop : maŋa : ükü еrtі : isig küčüg : berür : bunča : törüg : qazγanïp : inim Kültegin : üzе anča : kergek boltï : аqanïm qaγan : učduqta : Kültegin : jiti / : jašda : qaltï : /


I subdue all people, who live in four parts of the world. There was no enemy left. Many of them submitted to me. My younger brother, Kultegin passed away, after he had established the powerful lordship, where people had been giving their services to me. When my father, the kagan, passed away, my younger brother Kultegin was at the age of seven...
31
UmJtg ugm QTUN xUTya inm Kultign rTBUwi LTijgrmi JYiya CimQGN ilin turusin WaQzGOi LTiCUB SUGDQTpa suldmz BUzDmz TBGC yTUTx bistumn

Umay teg : ögüm : qatun : qutuŋa : inim Kültegin : er at boltï : altï jegirmi : jašïŋa : ečüm qaγan : Еlin : törüsün : anča : qazγantï : Altï čub : Soγdaq tapa : süledimiz : buzdïmïz : Tabγač : On Tutuq : beš tümen : sü kelti : süŋüšdümüz :


My younger brother Kultegin became a man due to good luck of my Umay-like mother, the katun. When he was sixteen, my uncle, the kagan, gathered the lords. We went on a campaign in direction of Six-Čub Sogdian colonies. The Chinese governor On-Tutuq came with fifty thousand armies. And we fought.
32
Kultign JDGN UpLJUtgdi UyTUTx JURCin JRQLG lgnTUTDi JRQLGDi QGNQa WULDi ULsug OaJxQiYDmz birUTz JYiyi CCa sunKi suyYdmz ylKi TDQsCURy BUz

Kültegin : jadaγаn : оplayu tegdi : On Tutuq : Yorčïn : yarаqlïγ : eligin tutdï : yarаqlïγdï : qaγanqa : ančulаdï : ol süg : anta yoq qïšdïmïz : bir otuz : jašïŋï : Čača : Sünke : süŋüšdümüz : еŋ ilki : Tadqïs Čurïŋ : boz/ atïγ : binip : tegdi : ol at anta : /


Kultegin attacked on his foot. He took On-Tutuq Yorčyn with his army. He showed their weapons to the kagan. We destroyed that army then. When he was twenty-one years old, we fought against General Čača. First he mounted Tadqyš Čor's gray horse and attacked. That horse died there.
33
ulti Kinti iYBRaJmTR BUzTG binp tgdi ULTOa ulti uCW jgnsil bgy Kdmlg TURGT binp tgdi ULTOa ulti JRQiOa JLmSOa juzRTx xUNURTi jizya BYiya birtgmdi

ölti : ekinti : Ϊšbara Yamtar : boz atïγ : binip : tegdi : ol at anta : ölti : üčünčü : Jegin Sil : begiŋ : kedimlig : tоruγ at : binip : tegdi : ol at anta : ölti : yarаqïnta : yalmasïnta : jüz artuq : oqun urtï : jeziŋe : bašïŋa : bіr te/gmedi/


Secondly, he mounted Isbara Yamtar's gray horse and attacked. That horse died there. Thirdly, he mounted Yigan Silbeg's dressed bay horse and attacked. That horse died there. He was hit with more than one hundred arrows on his armor and caftan, (but) he was not hit on head and face even once.
34
tgdqin turq bglr xUpbilirsiz ULsug OaJxQiYDmz OaKisra jrBJRxU ULGirKn JGiBUwi NiJFi turgiJRGUN Kulta BUzDmz ULGirKn zkFa rn tzp BRDi Kultign

tegdiken : Türük : begler : qop bilirsiz : ol süg : anta yoq qïšdïmïz : anta kisre : Jer Bayïrqu : Uluγ Erkin : yaγï boltï : anï yaŋï : Тürgi Үarаγun : költe : buzdumïz : Uluγ Erkin : azqïŋa : erin : tizip : bardï : Kültegin ...


Turkish lords, you all know what attacking is! We destroyed that army then. Then Great Irkin of Bayirqu land became our hostile. We destroyed him too at Turgi-Yaraγun lake. The Great Irkin ran away together with few men. Kultegin was...
35
JYiya kiRQzTpa suldmz suyuq BTmi QRG suKin Kugmn jiYG TUGa JURip kiRQz BUDNG UDa BSDmz QGNin birla SUyajiYDa suyYdmz Kultign BJRxUN

jašïŋa : Qïrγïz tapa : süledimiz : süŋüкü : batamï : qaraγ : sükіn : Kögmen : jïšïγ : toγa : yorïp : Qïrγïz : budunïγ : uda : basdïmïz : qaγanïn : birle : Suŋa jïšda : süŋüšdümüz : Kültegin Bayïrqun /аq adγïrïγ : /


... year old. We went on a campaign against Kirgiz. Dissecting lance-deep snow we marched around the Kogman mountains and fell upon Kirgiz people. We fought with their kagan at the Soŋa mountains. Kultegin mounted Bayirqu's (white stallion)
36
binp UpLJU tgdi bir rg xUNURTi Kirg UDYRU SWDi ULtgdqda BJRxUny QDGRG UDLQin siJU URTi kiRQz QGNin ulrtmz ilin LTmz ULjiLQa turgs

binip : оplayu : tegdi : bir : erig : oqun urtï : eki erig : udušru : sančïdï : ol tegdikde : Bayïrqunuŋ : аq adγïrïγ : udluqïn : sïyu : urtï : Qïrqïz : qaγanïn : ölürtimiz : elin : altïmïz : ol jïlqa : Türügeš...


and attacked. He hit one man with an arrow and killed two men with spear. He was attacking until the backbone of Bayirqu's white stallion was broken. We killed the Kirgiz kagan and conquered his country. In that year we marched to Turgesh ...
37
TUGa rtsugzg KCa JURiDmz turgs BUDNG UDaBSDmz turgs QGN susu BULCUDa BURCa Klti suyYdmz Kultign BYGUBUzT binptgdi BYGUBUzT

toγa : Ertis ügüzüg : keče : yorïdïmïz : Türgeš : budunïγ : uda : basdïmïz : Türgeš : qaγan : süsi : Bolčuda : otča : borča : keltі : süŋüšdümüz : Kültegin : bašγu boz at : binip tegdi : bašγu boz at : k...


crossing over the Irtish river. We fell upon Turgesh people and conquered them. A lot of army of the Turgesh kagan came clustered (against us) at Bolču land. We fought with them. Kultegin mounted Bašγu's white horse and attacked. The Bašγu's white horse ...
38
TUTzTi Kisin uziwzDi OaJNa Kirp turgs QGN BUJRxi zTUTxUG lgnTUTDi QGNinOa ulrtmz ilinLTmz QRaturgs BUDN xUpiCKdi ULBUDNG TBRDa QU...

tutuztï : ekisin : özü аltizdï : anta yana : kirip : Türgeš : qaγan : buyruqï : az tutuquγ : eligin tutdï : qaγanïn anta : ölürtimiz : elin : altïmïz : Qara Türgeš : budun : qop ičikdi : ol budunïγ : Tabarda : /qo.../


.... and he (i.e., Kultegin) himself captured two of them. There he again broke into (the enemy's lines) and captured the Az Tutuq (Governor) and his army. There we killed their kagan and subdued his country. Many of the common Turgesh people run away. We ... those people in Tabar.
39
SUGDQ BUDN itjintijn jiWu ugzg KCa tmrQpGQa tgi suldmz OaKisra QRaturgs BUDN JGiBULms KyrsTpa BRDi bizysu Ti TURx zUQi JUxrti JBLQKisi r

Soγdaq : budun : іtіjin tijin : Jenčü : ügüzüg : keče : Temir Qapïγqa : tegi : süledimiz : anta kisre : Qara Türgeš : budun : yaγï bolmuš : Keŋeres tapa : bardï : biziŋ sü : atï : turïq : azuqï : yoq erti : yablaq kiši : er...


To subdue Sogdian people, we marched as far as the Iron Gate, crossing over the Pearl (Syrdaria) river. Then common Turgesh people rose in revolt in back. We went back toward Kanaris. Our army horses were lean and army had no provisions. A coward man ...
40
Lpr bizya tgmYrti OGudKa uKnp Kultigng zrn irturu iTmz ULGsuyY suyYmY LpYLCi QTin binp tgmY QRaturgs BUDNG OaulrmY LmY JNa JURp

аlïp er : biziŋe : tegmiš erti : antaγ ödke : ökünüp : Külteginig : az erin : ertürü : ïtmïz : uluγ süŋüš : süŋüšdümüz : Alïp Šalčï : aq atïn : binip : tegmiš : Qara Türgeš : budunïγ : anta ölürmüš : almïš : ajna : yorïp : ...


A brave man attacked us. We asked and sent Kultegin forward together with a few men. It was a great battle. He mounted the white horse of Alp Šalči and attacked. There we killed and subjugated the common Turgish people. Having marched again ...
The Kul Tegin Inscription. 2nd side.
1
birla xUYUTUTx birla suyYmY rinxUp ulurms binBRmin xUp Klurti Kultign jitiUTz JYiya QRLx BUDN rurBRUR rKli JGiBUwi TmGiDx BYDa suyYdmz

... : birle : Qošu tutuq : birle : süŋüšmüs : erin qop : ölürmüš : еbin barïmïn : qop : kelürti : Kültegin : jeti otuz : jašïŋa : Qarluq : budun : erür barur : erikli : yaγï boltï : Tamaγ ïduq : bašta : süŋüšdümüz :


We fought with ... against Qosu Tutuq. He (i.e. Kultegin) killed many of their brave men. He brought a lot of their properties and belongings. When Kultegin was twenty-seven years old, he went to Karluk people. They became (our) enemy. We went on a campaign to Tamaq-iduq headwaters.
2
Kultign ULsuyYda UTzJYJURrti LpYLCi Qin binp UpLJU tgdi Kirg UDYRU SWDi QRLxUG ulrtmz LTmz zBUDN JGiBUwi QRaKulta suyYdmz Kultign birQiRQ JYJURrti LpYLCi Qin

Kültegin : ol süŋüšde : otuz jašаyur еrtі : Alïp šalčï : aqïn : binip : oplayu : tegdi : eki erig : udušru : sančïdï : Qarluquγ ölürtіmіz : altïmïz : Аz budun : yaγï boltï : Qara költe : süŋüšdümüz : Kültegin : bir qïrïq : jašаyur еrtі : Alïp šalčï : aqïn :


Kultegin was thirty years old on that battle. He mounted the white horse of Alp Šalči and attacked. He stabbed two men pursuing them. We won the Karluk and subjugated them. Az people started hostilities against us. We went with a battle to the Black Lake. Kultegin was thirty-one years old then. He mounted the white horse of Alp Šalči
3
binp UpLJUtgdi zltbrg TUTDi zBUDN OaJxBUwi CimQGN ili QmYG BULTxiOa BUDN ilgiKgi BULTxiOa izgl BUDN birla suyYdmz Kultign LpYLCi Qinbinp

binip : oplayu : tegdi : Az Elteberig : tutdï : Az budun : anta yoq boltï : Ečim qaγan : Еli : qamïšïγ : boltuqïnta : budun : Еlig еkіgi : boltuqïnta : Izgel : budun : birle : süŋüšdümüz : Kültegin : Alïp šalčï : aqïn : binip :


and attacked. He took the governor of Az people to prison. Az people were annihilated then. When the empire of my uncle, the kagan, became shaky and when country was split into two parts, we fought against the Izgil people. Kultegin mounted the white horse of Alp Šalči
4
i ULTOa tusdi izglBUDN ulti TxUzUGz BUDN Kntu BUDNm rti tyri jir BULGQin uCun JGiBUwi birjaLQa biYJULi suyYdmz yilK TUGUBLkDa suyYdmz

[oplayu : tegd] i : ol at anta : tüstü : Izgel : budun : öltü : Toquz Oγuz : budun : kentü : budunïm : erti : Teŋіri : jer : bolγaqïn : üčün : yaγï boltï : bir yïlqa : beš yolï : süŋüšdümüz : eŋ ilki : Toγu balïqda : süŋüšdümüz


and attacked. That horse fell down there. Izgil people were killed and destroyed. Tokuz-Oguz people were my own people. Since Tengri and earth became in disorder them, they revolted against us. We fought five times in a year. First we fought at Toγu-Balïq (city).
5
Kultign zmNQG binp UpLJU tgdi LTirg SWDi sutYisiOa jitWrg kiLCLDi Knti QUYLGQDa dz birla suyYdmz Kultign zJGzin binp UpLJU tgp birrg SWDi

Kültegin : Azman aqïγ : binip : oplayu : tegdi : altï erig : sančïdï : sü /tï/šïsïndа : yetinč erig : qïlïčladï : ekinti : Qušluγqada Еdiz : birle : süŋüšdümüz : Kültegin : Az yaγïzïn : binip : oplayu : tegdi : bir erig : sančïdï :


Kultegin mounted white horse Azman and attacked. He stabbed six men with his lance. In hand-to-hand fighting he cut down the seventh man with a sword. The Second time we fought against Еdiz at Qušluγqaq. Kultegin mounted his brown horse Az and attacked. He stabbed one man with a lance.
6
TxUzrgigra TxiDi dz BUDN Oaulti uCW BULCiDa UGzbirla suyYdmz Kultign zmNTG binp tgdi SWDi susin SWDmz ilin LTmz turtW CUY BYiOa suyYdmz turq

toquz erig egire : toqïtï : budun : anta ölti : üčünč : Bоl/ču/da : Oγuz birle : süŋüšdümüz : Kültegin : Azman atïγ : binip : tegdi : sančïdï : Učuš bašïnta : süŋüšdümüz : Türük :


He took nine men to prison. Their people were killed then. The third time we fought against Oguz at Bolču. Kultegin mounted his Azman horse and attacked and stabbed. We fought at Učuš headwaters. Turkish
7
BUDN DQQmYTDi JBLQBUwC irti UzaKlms susin Kultign GTp TUyRa birUGY LpGU UNrg TUyatign JUGiOa grpulrtmz bisW zgnti QDzda UGz birla suysdmz Kultign zJGzin binp tgdi KirgSWDi BLika BRmDiULsu Oaulti mGiQURGN QiYLp Jziya UGzGRU suTYQDmz Kultign bgBYLJU QiTmz UGzJGi URDUG BRDi Kultign

budun : Adïr Qamïšta : yablaq boltï : erti : öze : kelmiš : süsin : Kültegin : ïγïtïp : Toŋra : bir oγuš : alpaγu : on erig : Toŋra tegin yoγïnta : egirip : ölürtümüz : besinči : Ezgenti : Qadïzda : Oγuz : birle : süŋüšdümüz : Kültegin : Az yaγïzïn : binip : tegdi : eki erig : sančïdï : balïqa : barmadï ol sü : anta öltü : Маγï Qorγan : qïšlap : yazïŋа : Oγuz γaru : sü tašqadïmïz : Kültegin : beg bašlayu : aqïtmïz : Oγuz yaγï : оrduγ : basdï : Kültegin :

people were coward at Adïr Qamïs. Kultegin put their army, which had come earlier assaulting. We surrounded and killed ten giant warriors of Toŋra tribe at the funeral of (Prince) Toηrategin. Fifthly, we fought against Oguz at Azginti-Qadiz. Kultegin mounted his brown horse Az and attacked. He stabbed two men. He didn't go to city. That army was killed (= defeated) there, not arriving to the city. After we spent winter at Maγï-Qorγan, in spring we marched off with an army against Oguz. Kultegin being in home commanded the camp.
8
ugszQin binp TxUzrn SWDi URDUG birmdi ugmQTUN ULJU uglrm Klrm Klyunm xUWJLRm BUWajma tirgi KuyBUwCirti ulgi JURTDa JULTa JTUQwC rtgn

Ögsiz aqïn : binip : toquz erіn : sančïdï : оrduγ : bermedi : ögüm qatun : ulayu : ögelerim : eklerim : kelüŋünüm : qunčuylarïm : bunča jeme : tirigі : küŋ boltačï erti : ölüge : yortadï : yolta : yatu qïltаčï : ertegin :

The hostile Oguz attacked the camp. Having mounted his white orphan horse, Kultegin stabbed nine men and did not give the camp. My mother, Katun, and my stepmothers, my mothers-in-law, my elder sisters, my daughters-in-law, my princesses all these people would become slaves. They would have been left lying dead on roads.
9
Kultign Jxrsr xUp ultCi rtgz inm Kultign KrgK BUwi uzm SQOm Kurur Kuzm Kurmztg bilr bilmztg BUwi uzmSQOm udtyri JSR KisiUGLi xUp ulgli turums

Kültegin : yoq erser : qop : ölteči : ertegiz : inim : Kültegin : kergek : boltï : özüm : saqïntïm : körür : közüm : körmez teg : bilür : biligim : bilmez teg : boltï : özüm saqïntïm : Őd Teŋri : yasar : kisi oγlu : qop : ölgeli : törürmiš :

If Kultegin had never existed, we all would have been died. My younger brother Kultegin passed away. I mourned myself missing him. My eyes to see became as if they were blind. My mind to think became as if it were unconscious. I mourned myself missing him. Tengri creates death. Human beings have all been created in order to die.
10
Wa SQOm Kuzda JYKlsr tiDa Kuylta siGT Klsr JORU SQOm QTGdi SQOm KiYD ULJU Jnjgunm UGLNm bglrm BUDNm KuziQYi JBLQ BULwCitip SQOm JUGCi siGTCi kiTF TTBi BUDN BYLJU

anča : saqïntïm : közde : yaš kelser : etide : köŋülte : sïγat : kelser : yantïru : saqïntïm : qatïγdï : saqïntïm : еk šаd : ulayu : inijigünüm : olγanïm : beglerim : budunum : közi qačï : yablaq : boltačï tep : saqïntïm : yoγčï : sïγtačï : Qïtań : Tatabï : budun : bašlayu :

I mourned badly. Tears dropped down from my eyes and didn't stop. Sorrow captured my heart and didn't pass away. I cried missing him always. I mourned deeply in sorrow. I worried that the eyes and eyebrows of two šads and of my younger brothers left behind, my sons, my lords and all of my people could have been coward. I missed him. Heading mourners and lamenters of Qitaη and Tatabi peoples,
11
UDRsyun Klti TBGCQGOa isji liKy Klti birtumnGi LTUNKumY KrgKsz Klurti tupu QGOa buln Klti QURJa Kun BTSQDQa SUGD brCKr BUQRQULs BUDOa nKsyun UGLTRQN Klti

Udur Seŋün : kelti : Tabγač qaγanta : Isіje : Likеŋ : kelti : bir tümen aγï : altun kümüš : kergeksiz : kelürti : Tüpüt : qaγanta : Bülün : kelti : qurïya : kün : batsïqdaqï : Soγud : Berčеker : Buqaraq ulus : budunta : Іneк Seŋün : Оγul Тarqan : kelti :

Udar Seŋün came. From the Chinese emperor, Isіje Likеŋ came. He brought immeasurable quantity of silk, gold and silver in abundance. From the Tibet kagan Bülin came. Inek Seŋün and Oγal Tarkan came from Sogdians, Persians and Bukhara people in west.
12
UNx UGLm turgs QGOa mQRC TmGCi UGzbilga TmGCi Klti kiRQz QGOa TRDUY iNWUCUR Klti BRQ itguCi bdz JRTGma bitgTY itguCi TBGC QGN CiQNi Cysyun Klti

On oq : oγulum : Türügeš : qaγanta : Maqrač : tamγačï : Oγuz : Bilge : tamγačï : kelti : Qïrqïz : qaγanta : Tarduš : Ïnanču Čur : kelti : Barïq156 : itgüči : Bediz157 : yaratïγma : bitig taš158 : itgüči : Tabγač : qaγan : čiqanï : Čеŋ Seŋün : kelti :

From my On-Ok descendants, from the Turgesh kagan, seal-keepers Maqarač and Oγuz Bilge came. From the Kirgiz kagan, Tardush Inanču Čor came. Čan Seŋün, the nephew of the Chinese Emperor, came in order to build the mausoleum, to make sculptures, to paint and to prepare inscription stone inscriptions.
13
Kultign xUFjiLQa jiti jgrmKi UCDi TUQzWJ jitiUTzQa JUG rturtmz BRQin bdzin bitgTYn biCin jiLQa jitWJ jitiUTzQa xUpLTDmz Kultign uzikiRQ RTxjitiJYy BUwT TYBRQBUWa bdzCig TUJGN ltbr Kluti

Kültegin : qoň : jïlqa : jeti : jegirmeke : učdï : toquzïnčï ay : jeti otuzqa : yoγ : ertürtümüz : barïqïn : bedizin : bitig tašïn : bičin jïlqa : jetinč ay : jeti otuzqa : quplatïmïz : Kültegin : özі qïrq : artuq : jiti yašïn : boltït : taš /barïqïn/ : bunča : bedizčig : tuyγun : El teber : kelürti :

Kultegin passed away (lit.: 'flew away to Tengri') on the seventeenth day of the Sheep Year. We held (his) funeral on the twenty-seventh day of the ninth month. We finished his mausoleum, the statues and paintings, and his inscription stone on the twenty-seventh day of the seventh month, in the Monkey Year. Kultegin was at age of forty-seven. The Tuyγun Elteber brought all of these sculptors and painters.
14
BUWa bitg bitgma Kultign Tisi JULGtign bitidm jigrmi Kun ULRp BUTYQa BU TamQa xUp JULGtign bitidm iGR UGLNyzDa TJGUNyzDa jgda igdur rtgz UCaBRDGz tyri tirgdKiCi

bunča : bitig : bitigme : Kültegin : atïsï : Joluγ tegin : bitidim : jegirme : kün : olurup : bu tašqa : bu : tamqa : qop : Joluγ tegin : bitidim : ïγar : oγlanïŋïzdа : tuyγunïŋïzda : jegde : jegdür : ertigiz : uča bardïγïz : Teŋiri : tirigedkeči :

The one, who had inscribed all these inscriptions – I, (Prince) Yolluγtegin, the nephew of Kultegin. Having sat down twenty days I, (Prince) Yolluγtegin, inscribed all these inscriptions on this stone. For sons and relatives to cry. Blessed you. You passed away (lit.: 'went flying') until Tengri gives you life again.
The Kul Tegin Inscription. Chinese inscription side.
1
xURDNULGDurti inmqultign ... isig quCgbirtquCnturqbilgaQGNJxiQa inmqultigngquuzdiULRT .. nWU paJRGNTRQN ... aTGbrtm ... ... rtm

qurïdun : /?/uγud еrtі : inim Kültegin : ölti...isig küčüg : bertik üčün : Türük : Bilge qaγan : yoqïqa : inim Kültegin : közdü : olurt... Ininču : apa : yarγan : tarqan : atïγ : bertim /...?/


From west ... my younger brother Kultegin had died… gave his services, my younger brother Kultegin (ordered to sat) a watcher of the tomb of Turkish Bilga kagan… I gave him the title Inanču Apa Yarγan Tarqan ...
The Kul Tegin Inscription. 3rd side.
1
tyritg tyrida BULmY turq bilga QGN BUudKa ULRTm SBmN tuKti sidgl ULJU injgunm UGLNm birKi UGYm BUDNm birji YDpiTbglr jiRJa TRQTBUJRxbglr UTz

Teŋіriteg : Тeŋiride : bolmuš : Türük : Bilge : qaγan : bu ödüke : olurtum : sabїmїn : tüküti : esid+egil : ulayu : inijügünüm : oγlanїm : biriki : oγušum : budunum : birije : šad apїt begler : jїrїya : tarqat : bujruq : begler : Otuz ...

I, Tengri-like and Tengri-born Turkish Bilge Kagan, succeeded to the throne at this time. Hear my words, all of you, my younger brothers and my sons, and my nation and relatives, my people! You, Šad-apit lords in south, tarkans and buyruq lords in north, Otuz (Tatar?),
2
TxUzUGz bglri BUDNi BUSBmn dguti sid QTGDi tiyLa ilgru Kun TUGSQa birgru Kun URTUsiyRU xURiGRU Kun BTskiya jiRGRU tun URTUsiyRU Oa iCrKi BUDN xUp mya Kurr

Toquz Oγuz : begleri budunї : bu sabїmїn : edgüti : esid : qatїγdї : tїŋla : ilgerü : kün : toγusїqa : birgerü : kün : ortusїŋaru : qurїγaru : kün : batїsїqїna : jїrїγaru : tün : ortusїŋaru : аnta : ičreki : budun : qop : maŋa : ükü erür : anča : budun

Tokuz-Oguz lords and people! Hear these words of mine well, and listen hard! All people following me eastwards to sunrise, southwards to midday, westwards to sunset, and northwards to midnight (listen this)!
3
xUp itdm ULmTi FGJx turq QGN utqn jiY ULRSR ilta BUyJx ilgru YOUyJziQatgi suldm TLUJQa KiCg tgmdm birgru TxUz rsnKa tgi suldm tuputKa KiCg tgmdm xURiGRU jWuugz

qop : etdim : ulamtї : aňїγ yoq : Türük : qaγan : Őtüken : yїš : olursar : elte : buŋ yoq : іlgerü : Šantuŋ : yazїqategi : süledim : Taluyqa : kičig : tegmedim : birgerü : Toquz : Ersenke : tegi : süledim : Tüpütke : kičig : tegmedim : qurїγaru : Jenčü ügüz :

I made you more. There is no false in these words. If the Turkish kagan rules from the Otukan mountains, then there will be no trouble in country. I went on campaigns eastwards up to the Shantung plain. I almost reached the sea. I went on campaigns southwards up to Tokuz-Arsin. I almost reached Tibet. Westwards beyond the Pearl River
4
KCa tmrQpGQa tgi suldm jiRGRU jrBJRxU jiriya tgi suldm BUWa jirKa tgi JURTDm utqn jiYDa jig idiJx rms ilTUTSQ jir utqn jiYrmY BUjirda ULRp TBGC BUDN birla

keče : Temir Qapїγqa : tegi : süledim : jїrїγaru : Jer Bayїrqu : jeriŋe : tegi : süledim : bunča : jerke : tegi : yorutdїm : Őtüken : yїšda : jeg : їdї yoq : ermiš : El tutsar : jer : Őtüken : yїš ermiš : bu jerde : olurupan : Tabγač : budun : birle :

I went on campaigns up to the Iron Gate. Northwards I went on campaigns up to Bayirqu land. I went on campaigns up to all these places. There was no good ruler in the Otukan mountain. The place from which the country can be controlled is the Otukan mountain. Having stayed in this place, I ruled
5
tuzltm LTUN KumY isgti xUTJ BUySz Wabirur TBGC BUDN SBi suCig Gisi jimYQ rms suCig SBN jmYQ Gin Rp iRQBUDNG WaJGUTir rms JGRU xUOxDa isra FGbilgOaujur rms

tüzeltim : аltun : kümüš : isigti : qutuy : buŋsuz : anča berür : Tabγač : budun : sabї : süčig : aγїsї : jїmšaq : ermiš : süčig : sabїn : jїmšaq : aγїn : arїp : їraq : budunїγ : anča yaγutї er : ermiš : yaγuru : qontuqda : isire : aňїγ bilge : anta üjür : ermis :

the Chinese people. The words of Chinese people, who give us gold, silver, alcohol and treasures in abundance, have always been sweet and silks have always been soft. Deceiving by their sweet words and soft silks, they attract people to come from remote places. After people have settled close to them, they made people be addicted to them even more.
6
dgu bilga Kisig dgu LpKisig JURTmzrms birKisi JyLSR UGYi BUDNi bisqiya tgi kiDmz rmY suCig SBiya jmYQ Gisiya RTURp qus turq BUDN ultg turq BUDN ulsKy birja CUGJ jiY tugltn

еdgü : bilge : kišig : edgü : alїp кišig : jorutmaz : ermis : bir кiši : yaŋїlsar : oγušї : budunї : besükiŋe : tegi : uqїdmаz : ermis : süčig : sabїŋa : jїmšaq : aγїsїŋa : аrturїp : üküš : Türük : budun : ölteg : Türük : budun : ölsekiŋ : berje : Čuγay : Yїš : Тügeltin :

They do not let wise men and brave men come close. They corrupt beginning from a single man up to his whole family and clan. Having been deceived by their sweet words and soft silk, you Turkish people, died! In order to survive Turkish people intended to settle at the Čuγay mountains in south on Тügeltin
7
Jzi xUNJintisr turq BUDN ulsKgOa FGKisi Wa BUYGURUR rms iRQrsr JBLQ Gibirur JGL rsr dgu Gibirur tipWa BUYGURUR rms bilg bilmz Kisi ULSBG Lp JGRU BRp uKYKiYi ultg

yazї : qonuyїn tеser : Türük : budun : ölsekiginte : аňїγ kiši : anča : bošγurur : ermis : їraq erser : yablaq : aγї berür : yaγїl : erser : edgü : aγї berür : tep anča : bošγurur : ermis : bilig : bilmez : kiši : ol sabïγ : alïp : yaγïru : barïp : üküš kiši : ölteg :

plain. They deceived so much, that led Turkish common people to death. They lied that they would give bad silk if be afar, and would give good silk if they would be close to them. Unwise people followed that words, went close and all died.
8
ULjrgru BRSR turq BUDN ultCisn utuKn jirULRp RQY tirKY iSR nyBUyGJx utqn jiY ULRSR bygu ilTUTa ULRTCisn turq BUDN TxRQQsn aCsQ TUSQumzsn bir TUDSR aCsQ umzsn OGyN

оl jergerü : barsar : Türük : budun : öltečisеn : Ötüken : jer : olurup : аrqïš : tirkiš : ïsar : neŋ buŋïγ yoq : Ötüken : Yïš : olursar : beŋgü : el tuta : olurtačïsïn : Türük : budun : toq аrïqqasïn : аčsïq : tosïq ümüzsen : bіr : tоdsar : аčsïq : ümüzsen : antaγïŋïn :

If you go toward those places, О Turkish people, you will die! If you stay in the land of Otukan, and send caravans from there, you will have no trouble. If you stay at the Otukan mountains, you will live forever dominating the countries! О Turkish people, you always regard yourselves as satiated. You do not think of being hungry or satiated. Once satiated, you forget of being hungry. On account of your being so,
9
uCun igdmY QGNyN SBin LmTin jirSJU BRDG xUpOa LQOG RLTG OaQLmYi jir SJxUp TURU ulu JURJURrtg tyri JRLQDxin uCun inm xUTmBRuCun QGN ULRTm QGN ULRp

üčün : іgіdmiš : qaγanŋïn : sabïn : almatïn : Jer Sayu : bardïq : qop anta : alqïntïγ : arïltïγ : anta qalmïšï : Jer : Sayu qop : turu : ölü : yorïyor erteg : Teŋіri : yarïlqadïqïn : üčün : özüm : qutum : bar üčün : qaγan : olurtum : qaγan : olurup :

you didn't listen to the words of your kagan, who had nourished you. You went away in all directions. You completely tired and become weak. Those who survived where utterly exhausted. But Tengri was gracious, and since I was granted with fortune, I succeeded to the throne. Having succeeded to the throne,
10
Jx CiGF BUDNG xUp xUBRTDm CiGF BUDNG BJQiwm nBUDNG quY Qiwm zUBUSBmDa igdBRGU turq bglr BUDN BUNi sidy turq ...rp ilTUTSQyN BUOa URTm JyLp ulsKyn jma

yoq : čïγaŋ : budunïg : qop : qubartïdïm : čïγaŋ : budunïγ : bay qïltïm : ne budunïγ : üküš : qïltïm : azu bu sabïmdï : іgіd barγu : Тürük : begler : budun : bunï : esidiŋ : Тürük budunïγ terip : el tutsaqïŋïn : bunta : urtum : yaŋïlïp : ölsekiŋin : yeme :

I changed all poor and destitute people. I made poor people wealthy and few people numerous. This word of mine is blessed! О Turkish lords and people, hear this! In order to join together all Turkish people and direct our country, I have inscribed here: Being deceived you will die.
11
BUOa URTm nyny SBm rsr bygu TYQa URTm yRKuru bily turq mTi BUDN bglr budKa Kurgma bglrgu JywCisin mn b...C QGOa bdzCi Klurtm bdztm mny SBmN simDi

bunta : urtum : neŋ neŋ : sabïm : erser : beŋgü : tašqa : urtum : aŋar körü : biliŋ : Тürük amtï : budun : begler : bödüke : körügme : begler gü : yaŋïltïčïsïn : men : b/eŋgü : tašqa : urtum : /Tabγač : qaγanta : bedizči : kelürtüm : bediztim : meniŋ : sabïmïn : sïmdï :

All words which I wanted to say I have inscribed on this eternal stone. Read these inscriptions! You, Turkish people now and lords! With the lords who had already been deceived there I had inscribed. I get painters from the Chinese emperor, and ordered them to inscribe. They put all my words on the stone.
12
TBGC QGNy iCrKi bdzCig iTi yRDWiGBRQ JRTURTm iCin TYin DWiG bdz URTURTm TYTUQiTDm KuyltKi SBmN ...L TTiya tgi BUNi Kuru bily byguTY

Tabγač : qaγanïŋ : ičreki : bedizčig : ïtï : aŋar adïnčïγ : barïq : yaraturtïm : ičin : tïšïn : adïnčïγ : bediz : urturtïm : taš toqïtdïm : köŋilteki : sabïmïn : /ul tašqa urturtïm : on oq : oγulïŋa : /аt atïŋa : tegi : körü : biliŋ : beŋgü taš : toqïtdïm :

The court painters of the Chinese emperor took part. I got them to build an extraordinary mausoleum. They decorated the inside and outside with wonderful paintings and sculptures. They inscribed all my word on the stone, I had all the words in my mind recorded. See these inscriptions and get lessons, all of you from my On-Ok descendants to slaves. I had the memorial stone inscribed.
13
TxiTDm BUrgjir UTQa rrgjrti irsr irgjrti byguTY TxTDm bitidmNiKurp Wabily ULTY ....m BUbitg bitgma Tisi JULGt

bu erig : jer : оtqa : er erig jerte : еrse erinč : erig jerte : beŋgü taš : toqïtdïm : bitidim : anï körüp : anča biliŋ : ol taš /toqït/dïm bu bitig : bitigme : atïsï : yoluγ te/gin/

This is plain place to live. I had the memorial stone erected for the brave man in this country and inscribed on this place. See this memorial and learn its contents. ... The one who inscribed these inscriptions is nephew (Prince) Yolluγtegin.
14
Kultigny LTUNiN KumYin GiYiN BRmiNtur ...QRsiN JGma TUJGT BU .... bgm tign jugru tyri ... TY bitdm JULLG tign

Külteginiŋ : altunïn : kümüšin : aγïšïn : barïmïn ...qarasïn : yoγïma : tuyuγut : ..bu ...begim : tegin : jügürü : Teŋі/ri ...taš : bitidim : Jolluγ tegin : ....

In order to take care of Kultegin's gold and silver, his treasures and possessions, his four (thousand?) horses.... Tengri … I inscribed the stone. (Prince) Yolluγtegin...
The Kultegin inscriptions. Inscriontions on stone turtle.
1
BUDN

budun...

people...
2
bglr BUDN

begler : budun : ...

lords and people ...
3
...ji Kultign bi...

...ji : Kültegin : bi...

... Kultegin ...
4
TmN BSDm

...tïmïn : basdïm : ...

... subdued ...
5
uzm

.özüm : ...γ...

... I, myself,...
6
ulu

..ölü...

... die ...
7
bi...

...

...


